Papercut 1 (#286)
AlexsLemonade/ScPCA-manuscript: content/02.introduction.md

As the number of scRNA-seq datasets expands, efforts have emerged to create centralized data resources.
For example, CELLxGENE [@doi:10.1101/2021.04.05.438318; @doi:10.1101/2023.10.30.563174] offers gene expression data from samples spanning hundreds of cell types in standardized analysis formats.
Other resources such the Human Cell Atlas (HCA) and Human Tumor Atlas Network (HTAN) offer harmonized data, enabling reliable cross-sample comparisons and discovery across diverse biological contexts and disease types.
The HCA, which provides a comprehensive map of all cell types in the human body using single-cell genomics, contains uniformly processed scRNA-seq data obtained from normal tissue with few samples derived from diseased tissue [@doi:10.7554/eLife.27041].
The HTAN also hosts a collection of genomic data from tumors across multiple cancer types, including scRNA-seq [@doi:10.1016/j.cell.2020.03.053].

> In spite of these resources, there have been considerably fewer efforts to harmonize and distribute data from pediatric tumors specifically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Despite these resources, there have been considerably fewer efforts to harmonize and distribute data specifically from pediatric tumors.
```

The ScPCA Portal holds uniformly processed summarized gene expression from 10x Genomics droplet-based single-cell and single-nuclei RNA-seq for over 700 samples from a diverse set of 55 types of pediatric cancers.
Originally comprised of data from 10 projects funded by ALSF, the Portal has since expanded to include data contributed by pediatric cancer research community members.
The Portal additionally includes data obtained from bulk RNA-seq, spatial transcriptomics, and feature barcoding methods such as CITE-seq and cell hashing.
All data on the Portal are available in formats ready for downstream analysis with common workflow ecosystems, including `SingleCellExperiment` objects used by `R/Bioconductor`[@doi:10.1038/s41592-019-0654-x] or `AnnData` objects used by `Scanpy` and related Python modules [@doi:10.1186/s13059-017-1382-0].
Downloaded objects contain both raw and normalized gene expression counts, dimensionality reduction results, cell type annotations, and copy-number variation estimates.

> As of January 2026, over 900 unique downloaders had accessed the Portal since its launch.

Reviewer: While we're here
```suggestion
As of May 2026, over 950 unique downloaders had accessed the Portal since its launch.
```

To ensure uniform processing of all current and future Portal data, we created `scpca-nf`, an open-source Nextflow [@doi:10.1038/nbt.3820] pipeline (<https://github.com/AlexsLemonade/scpca-nf>).

> This pipeline increases transparency and facilitate research across multiple samples and projects without re-processing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This pipeline increases transparency and facilitates analyses across multiple samples and projects without re-processing.
```

The `scpca-nf` workflow uses `alevin-fry` [@doi:10.1038/s41592-022-01408-3] for fast and efficient quantification of single-cell gene expression for all samples on the Portal, including scRNA-seq data and any associated CITE-seq or cell hash data.
The `scpca-nf` pipeline is also a resource, allowing researchers to process their own samples for comparison to Portal data and or for submission to the Portal.

Here, we present the Single-cell Pediatric Cancer Atlas as a freely-available resource for all pediatric cancer researchers.
The ScPCA Portal provides downloads ready for immediate use, allowing researchers to skip time-consuming data re-processing and wrangling steps.

> We provide comprehensive documentation about data processing and the contents of the Portal, including a guide to getting started working with an ScPCA dataset (<https://scpca.readthedocs.io/>).

Reviewer: I think this has to stay – shorten if you must
```suggestion
We provide comprehensive documentation about data processing and the contents of the Portal, including a guide to getting started working with an ScPCA dataset (<https://scpca.readthedocs.io/>).
The ScPCA Portal advances pediatric cancer research by accelerating researchers' ability to answer important biological questions.
```
